archive/mode/README.md, before:

# Deprecated Mode System Files

This directory contains archived files from the old explicit mode system that has been replaced with context-aware behavior.

## Why Deprecated

The original system required users to manually switch between "Edit" and "Simulate" modes using a mode palette. This created:
- Workflow friction (constant mode switching)
- Cognitive overhead (remembering current mode)
- Rigid separation (many actions could work in both modes)

## New System

The application now uses **context-aware behavior** based on simulation state:
- No explicit mode switching needed
- System detects what user is doing and adapts automatically
- Simulation state determines what actions are allowed

See: `doc/modes/MODE_ELIMINATION_PLAN.md`

## Files

### mode_events.py
- Original: `src/shypn/events/mode_events.py`
- Contains: `ModeChangedEvent`, `ToolChangedEvent`
- Replaced by: `SimulationState` enum and state detector

### mode_palette_loader.py
- Original: `src/ui/palettes/mode/mode_palette_loader.py`
- Contains: Mode switcher UI with [E] and [S] buttons
- Replaced by: Always-visible simulation controls

## Migration

**Old code**:
```python
if current_mode == 'edit':
    # Edit behavior
elif current_mode == 'simulate':
    # Simulate behavior
```

**New code**:
```python
from shypn.engine.simulation.state import SimulationStateDetector

if state_detector.can_edit_structure():
    # Edit behavior
else:
    # Show restriction message
```

## Timeline

- **Deprecated**: October 18, 2025
- **Archived**: October 18, 2025
- **Planned Removal**: After mode elimination complete (Phase 9)

## Documentation

- Analysis: `doc/modes/MODE_SYSTEM_ANALYSIS.md`
- Implementation: `doc/modes/MODE_ELIMINATION_PLAN.md`
- Critical: `doc/modes/PARAMETER_PERSISTENCE_ANALYSIS.md`

Commit message:

Clean up deprecated code and improve property dialogs
Three improvements completed:

1. Remove dead mode palette code
   - Moved src/ui/palettes/mode/mode_palette_loader.py → archive/mode/
   - File was not used anywhere (confirmed via grep search)
   - Mode switching replaced by context-aware behavior
   - Updated archive/mode/README.md documentation

2. Wire OK/Cancel buttons properly
   - Added action-widget response mappings to transition dialog
   - Added action-widget response mappings to arc dialog
   - Maps cancel_button to response -6 (GTK_RESPONSE_CANCEL)
   - Maps ok_button to response -5 (GTK_RESPONSE_OK)
   - Now properly triggers _on_response() handler

3. Normalize dialog widths for compactness
   - Reduced transition dialog: 600px → 500px width
   - Reduced height: 500px → 450px
   - Matches project dialog standard (450-500px)
   - More compact and consistent UI

Additional:
- Documented UI directory structure in doc/UI_DIRECTORY_STRUCTURE_ANALYSIS.md
- Clarified /ui/ (root) vs /src/shypn/ui/ purposes
- Confirmed current structure follows Python best practices

Architecture verified:
- /ui/ → Glade UI files (XML data files)
- /src/shypn/ui/ → Python UI helpers (importable code)
- Both locations are correct and serve different purposes

archive/mode/README.md, after:

# Deprecated Mode System Files

This directory contains archived files from the old explicit mode system that has been replaced with context-aware behavior.

## Why Deprecated

The original system required users to manually switch between "Edit" and "Simulate" modes using a mode palette. This created:
- Workflow friction (constant mode switching)
- Cognitive overhead (remembering current mode)
- Rigid separation (many actions could work in both modes)

## New System

The application now uses **context-aware behavior** based on simulation state:
- No explicit mode switching needed
- System detects what user is doing and adapts automatically
- Simulation state determines what actions are allowed

See: `doc/modes/MODE_ELIMINATION_PLAN.md`

## Files

### mode_events.py
- Original: `src/shypn/events/mode_events.py`
- Contains: `ModeChangedEvent`, `ToolChangedEvent`
- Replaced by: `SimulationState` enum and state detector

### mode_palette_loader.py (Original)
- Original: `src/ui/palettes/mode/mode_palette_loader.py`
- Contains: Mode switcher UI with [E] and [S] buttons
- Replaced by: Always-visible simulation controls
- **Note**: Original archived here, kept for reference

### mode_palette_loader_deprecated.py (Final Version)
- Original: `src/ui/palettes/mode/mode_palette_loader.py` (with deprecation warnings)
- Contains: Final version with deprecation warnings added
- Archived: October 18, 2025
- **Note**: This is the version that was in production when removed
- Contains deprecation warning pointing to this archive

## Migration

**Old code**:
```python
if current_mode == 'edit':
    # Edit behavior
elif current_mode == 'simulate':
    # Simulate behavior
```

**New code**:
```python
from shypn.engine.simulation.state import SimulationStateDetector

if state_detector.can_edit_structure():
    # Edit behavior
else:
    # Show restriction message
```

## Timeline

- **Deprecated**: October 18, 2025
- **Archived**: October 18, 2025
- **Planned Removal**: After mode elimination complete (Phase 9)

## Documentation

- Analysis: `doc/modes/MODE_SYSTEM_ANALYSIS.md`
- Implementation: `doc/modes/MODE_ELIMINATION_PLAN.md`
- Critical: `doc/modes/PARAMETER_PERSISTENCE_ANALYSIS.md`
